[RM CH4] Basic and High Performance Flavor profiles (#2320)
cntt-n/CNTT: doc/ref_model/chapters/chapter04.md

<p align="center"><b>Figure 4-2:</b> Workloads built against Cloud Infrastructure Profiles and compute Flavours.</p>

<a name="4.2.1"></a>
### 4.2.1 Workload Profiles

> Compute Flavours represent the compute, memory, storage, and management network resource sizing templates that are used to create VMs on the compute hosts. Each VM create request specifies a Workload Profile and a compute Flavour, which will determine the compute host (node) on which the VM will be hosted and the VMs compute, memory and storage characteristics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compute Flavours represent the compute, memory, storage, and management network resource templates that are used to create VMs on the compute hosts. Each VM create request specifies a Workload Profile and a compute Flavour, which will determine the characterisics of the compute host (node) on which the VM will be hosted and the VMs compute, memory and storage characteristics.
```
Suggest to delete "sizing", and add characteristics also for the compute host. The flavour is not the only input for the host selection.

> Compute Flavours represent the compute, memory, storage, and management network resource sizing templates that are used to create VMs on the compute hosts. Each VM create request specifies a Workload Profile and a compute Flavour, which will determine the compute host (node) on which the VM will be hosted and the VMs compute, memory and storage characteristics.

Reviewer 2: @joaoarodrigues The paragraph adresses the creation of VMs and it is not applicable to containers

Author: @karinesevilla It seems this one is already outdated. Could you submit a proposal for the line to be changed? Thank you

Parameterized Compute Flavours can be used by operators and specified in request for resources. 

Compute Flavours can also specify secondary ephemeral storage, swap disk, etc. A compute Flavour geometry consists of the following elements:

<a name="Table4-12"></a>

| Element                               | Description  |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Compute Flavour Name                  | A descriptive name |

> | Compute Flavour ID                  | Flavor unique identifier |

Reviewer 2: Do compute flavour name and ID apply to containers?
I would prefer to stick with resources sizing

Author: ```suggestion
```

| Memory                                | Virtual compute instance memory in megabytes.  |
| Ephemeral/Local Disk                  | Specifies the size of an ephemeral data disk that exists only for the life of the instance. Default value is 0.<br />The ephemeral disk may be partitioned into boot (base image) and swap space disks. |
| Root Disk                  | Specifies the size of '/' root partition. It can be considered an Ephemeral Disk |
| CPU Parameters                  | Capability to associate virtual CPUs to the physical CPUs, and enable specific CPU architectures |
| CPU Topology                  | NUMA topology and CPU pinning features can minimize latency and improve performance. Check which architecture is supported by the compute nodes.  |
| Network Parameters                  | Enable network capabilities allowing improvements on network performance (make sure that current deployment allows it, otherwise, it can lead either to a decrease on performance or instability) |
<p align="center"><b>Table 4-12:</b> Compute Flavour Geometry Specification.</p>

<a name="4.2.1.1"></a>
#### 4.2.1.1 Predefined Workload Profiles

> The following tables provide a descriptive approach on how a profile can be created to suit the needs of a workload, so it can be onboarded. This will minimize several challenges related to Infrastructure management:

Reviewer 2: 'The following tables' refer to tables no longer in 4.2.1.1.
 Profiles and profile extensions should be described before the workload flavours and profiles in 4.2

Author: ```suggestion
The availability of two (2) Profiles will facilitate and accelerate the workload deployment, in case there is a need to implement special capabilities, by the workload, then profile extensions can be used too. The following requirements were taken in consideration for the profile definition:
```

* Workloads can be deployed according to specific profiles (Basic; High Performance), and can be configured with a lower level of granularity by using profile extensions
* Profile extensions allow a more precise configuration of a workload (e.g. GPU, high, speed network, Edge deployment)
* Cloud infrastructure "scattering" is minimized
* Workload optimisation by using existing profiles and its extensions
* Better usage of Cloud Objects (Memory;Processor;Network;Storage)

The intent of the following profiles is to match the cloud infrastructure most common needs, and allow a more  comprehensive configuration in case needed. <br>

> NOTE: In Kubernetes based environments these are the resource requests of the containers in the pods. To get guaranteed resources the resource requests should be set to the same values as the resource limits, to get burstable resources the resource limits should be higher than the resource requests while to get best effort resources none of resource requests of resource limits should be set.

Reviewer: Do we need the second sentence with user guidance here? Suggest to delete it.

Author: @ulikleber Are you suggesting to remove the note? (I've included this comments, just to raise awareness, that  infrastructure allocation to a workload could look similar, but it has somme difference to be taken in consideration)

Reviewer: I suggested to remove the second part of the note about guiding the usage of resource limits in requests, i.e. "To get guaranteed resources the resource requests should be set to the same values as the resource limits, to get burstable resources the resource limits should be higher than the resource requests while to get best effort resources none of resource requests of resource limits should be set." But if others like to keep it, it is also ok.

Author: ```suggestion
NOTE: On a Kubernetes based environment, resource allocation will directly depend on how resource requests are configured (please check [RA2](https://cntt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ref_arch/kubernetes/) for additional details).
```

> There are two workload profiles available which can be selected:

Reviewer: Need an extra line. Otherwise this sentence is part of the NOTE.

Author: ```suggestion

There are two workload profiles available which can be selected:
```

| Root Disk                  | Specifies the size of '/' root partition. It can be considered an Ephemeral Disk |
| CPU Parameters                  | Capability to associate virtual CPUs to the physical CPUs, and enable specific CPU architectures |
| CPU Topology                  | NUMA topology and CPU pinning features can minimize latency and improve performance. Check which architecture is supported by the compute nodes.  |
| Network Parameters                  | Enable network capabilities allowing improvements on network performance (make sure that current deployment allows it, otherwise, it can lead either to a decrease on performance or instability) |
<p align="center"><b>Table 4-12:</b> Compute Flavour Geometry Specification.</p>

<a name="4.2.1.1"></a>
#### 4.2.1.1 Predefined Compute Flavors

The following tables provide a descriptive approach on how a Compute flavor can be created to suit the needs of an application, so it can be onboarded. This will minimize several challenges related to Infrastructure management:

* Applications can be categorized based on their resource requirements towards cloud infrastructure

> * Additional flavors can be created which are linked to  to different VM requirements

Author: ```suggestion
* Profile extensions allow a more precise configuration of a workload (e.g. GPU, high, speed network, Edge deployment)
```

* Cloud infrastructure "scattering" is minimized
* Application scaling optimization
* Better usage of Cloud Objects (Memory;Processor;Network;Storage)
* Applications can be categorized based on their resource requirements towards cloud infrastructure

The intent of the following Flavors list, and respective profile is to be comprehensive and yet effective to cover both IT and NFV workloads. <br>

In Kubernetes based environments these are the resource requests of the containers in the pods. To get guaranteed resources the resource requests should be set to the same values as the resource limits, to get burstable resources the resource limits should be higher than the resource requests while to get best effort resources none of resource requests of resource limits should be set.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
There are two workload profiles available which can be selected:
```

There are two flavors profiles that can be used:

> * Basic: Minimum number attributes for Virtual Server Hardware configuration

Reviewer 3: @joaoarodrigues Can you use the definition of Basic and High Performance from [Section 2.4.1](https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/blob/master/doc/ref_model/chapters/chapter02.md#241-node-profiles-top-level-partitions):

- Basic: for Workloads that can tolerate resource over-subscription and variable latency.
- High Performance: for Workloads that require predictable computing performance, high network throughput and low network latency.

Author: ```suggestion
* Basic: Minimum number attributes for Virtual Server Hardware configuration
```
* Basic: for Workloads that can tolerate resource over-subscription and variable latency.

Author: ```suggestion
* Basic: Minimum number attributes for Virtual Server Hardware configuration
```
* Basic : for Workloads that can tolerate resource over-subscription and variable latency.

* High Performance: Detailed Hardware configuration of a virtual server. It allows a deep level configuration (e.g. Specific configuration parameters for Hardware acceleration)

<a name="Table4-13"></a>

| Ref | Attribute | Unit | (B)asic/(H)igh Performance | Presence |
|----------|--------------------------------------------|-------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------| -----------|

> | i.fl.001 | Flavor ID             | integer       | B/H           | Required |

Reviewer 3: Is the fl in the reference for "flavour"? If yes, then many items in this table are not in flavours but in profiles. Please note that for workloads OpenStack uses "Flavours" to also specify the profile but in RM that is not the case.

Author: @pgoyal01 This is a very good point that we need to clarify. We're in favour of using workloads in RM, agnostic to the Infrastructure, and leave to the RA1 (Flavor) and RA2 (workload) the data model definition. Therefore, we should define it in a granular way (in RM). Is that OK?

| i.fl.002 | vCPU                      | integer      | B/H           | Required |
| i.fl.003 | RAM                       | Gb           | B/H           | Required |
| i.fl.004 | external_disk             | Gb           | B/H           | Required |
| i.fl.005 | ephemeral-Disk            | Gb           | B/H           | Optional |
| i.fl.006 | root-disk                 | GB           | H             | Required
| i.fl.007 | cpu_SMT                   | Y/N          | H             | Optional

> | i.fl.008 | cpu_pinning               | Y/N          | H             | Optional

Reviewer 3: CPU pinning is not optional for H

Author: ```suggestion
| i.fl.008 | cpu_pinning               | Y/N          | H             |
```

> | i.fl.009 | cpu_alloc_ratio           | n:m          | H             | Optional

Reviewer 3: CPU Allocation Ratio for H is 1:1 for B will need to be specified or there should be a default

Author: ```suggestion
| i.fl.009 | cpu_alloc_ratio           | 1:1/n:m          | B/H             | Optional
```

> 

Reviewer 3: sorry to place this comment here -- it should be at the 4.2 Infrastructure Profiles Catalogue

Here are my suggestions for this Chapter:
4.2 Catalogue  (as it is in the TOC)
Description of the content and organization of this section

4.2.1 Workload Profiles
These Workload Profiles should be defined aligned with RM Chapter 02.

4.2.2 Compute Flavours
keep this about resource sizing cpu, RAM, different types of storage (ephemeral, etc.) and network speeds.

Author: @pgoyal01 The proposal is not aligned with TOC listed in #2384 (lets fix this one first here)

<img width="862" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/77441414/117291830-61c38480-ae67-11eb-9a5d-29090dabe29e.png">

> Compute Flavours represent the compute, memory, storage, and management network resource templates that are used by VMs on the compute hosts. Each VM is given a compute Flavour (resource template), which determines the VMs compute, memory and storage characteristics.

Reviewer 3: Suggest cahnges to align with changes in RM Chapter 02:
```suggestion
Compute Flavours represent the compute, memory, storage, and management network resource sizing templates that are used to create VMs on the compute hosts. Each VM create request specifies a Workload Profile and a compute Flavour, which will determine the compute host (node) on which the VM will be hosted and the VMs compute, memory and storage characteristics.
```

Reviewer 3: Should we add how this works for Pods?

> Customised (Parameterized) Flavors can be used in concession by operators and, if needed, and can be  created using TOSCA, HEAT templates, and/or VIM APIs. These compute Flavours are intended to be used for transitional purposes and workload vendors are expected to consume smaller Flavours and adopt microservices-based designs for their workloads.<br>

Reviewer 3: So as to avoid confusion with Node Flavours ([RM Chapter 02](https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/blob/master/doc/ref_model/chapters/chapter02.md#242-node-flavours-specialisations)) we should use "Compute Flavours" instead of just "Flavours". 
Should we have a definition section of terms used early on in this Chapter?
```suggestion
Parameterized Compute Flavours can be used by operators and specified in request for resources. 
```

<a name="Table4-12"></a>

| Element                               | Description  |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Compute Flavour Name                  | A descriptive name |
| Compute Flavour ID                  | Flavor unique identifier |
| Number of vCPUs | Number of virtual compute resources (vCPUs) presented to the VM instance.  |
| Memory                                | Virtual compute instance memory in megabytes.  |
| Ephemeral/Local Disk                  | Specifies the size of an ephemeral data disk that exists only for the life of the instance. Default value is 0.<br />The ephemeral disk may be partitioned into boot (base image) and swap space disks. |
| Root Disk                  | Specifies the size of '/' root partition. It can be considered an Ephemeral Disk |
| CPU Parameters                  | Capability to associate virtual CPUs to the physical CPUs, and enable specific CPU architectures |

> | NUMA                  | Allow system memory allocation into cells or nodes that are associated with particular CPUs (there could be performance degradation due to an high number of requests through this shared bus) |

Reviewer 3: suggest delete as NUMA will be specified by the Workload Profiles. In this chapter we should define the Workload Profiles aligned with the [Node Profile definitions](https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/blob/master/doc/ref_model/chapters/chapter02.md#241-node-profiles-top-level-partitions).

Author: @pgoyal01 The proposal is to remove NUMA attributes, because it shouldn't be configured at the flavor level?

Reviewer 3: @joaoarodrigues Yes

Author: ```suggestion
| CPU Topology                  | NUMA topology and CPU pinning features can minimize latency and improve performance. Check which architecture is supported by the compute nodes.  |
```

> | Network Parameters                  | Enable network capabilities allowing improvements on network performance (make sure that current deployment allows it, otherwise, it can lead either to a decrease on performance or instability) |

Reviewer 3: what does "allowing improvements on network performance" mean in the context of a Compute Flavour as Compute Flavours are a resource requesting mechanism.

Author: @pgoyal01 I've the following attributes to network parameters: 

network_DPDK; network_SRIOV; network_GPU; network_SmartNIC; network_FPGA; network_IPSec_Accel; network_Crypto_Accel; network_Transcode_Accel

Reviewer 3: @joaoarodrigues These could be in "extra specs". I think once we have the PR #2384 merged, it would be easy to add these capabilities

Author: @pgoyal01 We should have these, as granular as possible, the parameters (may vary) can be available in RA1 and RA2 (specific to each of the RAn)

Reviewer 3: @joaoarodrigues As a matter of practice only the person opening the conversation or the WSL "resolve Conversations". Thanks

<p align="center"><b>Table 4-12:</b> Compute Flavour Geometry Specification.</p>

<a name="4.2.1.1"></a>
#### 4.2.1.1 Predefined Compute Flavors

> The following tables provide a descriptive approach on how a Compute flavor can be created to suit the needs of an application, so it can be onboarded. This will minimize several challenges related to Infrastructure management:

Reviewer 3: Can we use "workload" instead of "application"?

How doe "Predefined Compute Flavours" minimize which infrastructure management challenges?

Author: @pgoyal01 Absolutely (--> workload). The flavors can be detailed (only) in RA1, so the RM would focus on what should be taken in account on the profile definition. Is that ok?

Author: @pgoyal01 This was addressed already. Thank you.

> * Applications can be categorized based on their resource requirements towards cloud infrastructure

Reviewer 3: What is this statement trying to convey?

> * Additional flavors can be created which are linked to  to different VM requirements

Reviewer 3: Aren't Parameterised Compute Flavours the mechanism when predefined Compute Flavours do not meet the needs of a VM request?

Author: @pgoyal01 Let me propose a different statement

> * Cloud infrastructure "scattering" is minimized

Reviewer 3: How do Compute Flavours achieve this and the the following bullets

* Application scaling optimization
* Better usage of Cloud Objects (Memory;Processor;Network;Storage)

> * Applications can be categorized based on their resource requirements towards cloud infrastructure

Reviewer 3: duplicate of the first bullet

The intent of the following Flavors list, and respective profile is to be comprehensive and yet effective to cover both IT and NFV workloads. <br>

In Kubernetes based environments these are the resource requests of the containers in the pods. To get guaranteed resources the resource requests should be set to the same values as the resource limits, to get burstable resources the resource limits should be higher than the resource requests while to get best effort resources none of resource requests of resource limits should be set.

> There are two flavors profiles that can be used:

Reviewer 3: What is a "flavour profile"? Consistent with RM Chapter 02, we should use "Workload Profile"

Author: Corretion done

> 

Reviewer 3: Please use the definitions consistent with [RM Chapter 02](https://github.com/cntt-n/CNTT/blob/master/doc/ref_model/chapters/chapter02.md#241-node-profiles-top-level-partitions)

* Basic: Minimum number attributes for Virtual Server Hardware configuration

* High Performance: Detailed Hardware configuration of a virtual server. It allows a deep level configuration (e.g. Specific configuration parameters for Hardware acceleration)

<a name="Table4-13"></a>

| Ref | Attribute | Unit | (B)asic/(H)igh Performance | Presence |
|----------|--------------------------------------------|-------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------| -----------|
| i.fl.001 | Flavor ID             | integer       | B/H           | Required |
| i.fl.002 | vCPU                      | integer      | B/H           | Required |
| i.fl.003 | RAM                       | Gb           | B/H           | Required |
| i.fl.004 | external_disk             | Gb           | B/H           | Required |
| i.fl.005 | ephemeral-Disk            | Gb           | B/H           | Optional |
| i.fl.006 | root-disk                 | GB           | H             | Required

> | i.fl.007 | cpu_SMT                   | Y/N          | H             | Optional

Reviewer 3: I think cpu_SMT is enabled for both Basic and High Performance Node Profiles. Given that this will be specified in the Node Profiles it should also be defined in Workload Profile and thus not in Compute Flavour

Author: @pgoyal01 In case the host doesn't support SMT Architecture this will fail (hw:cpu_thread_policy set to prefer then it works). Therefore, this shall be used for High Performance

Reviewer 3: @joaoarodrigues This is the Reference Model (RM) and not how and what OpenStack does. The RM is technology agnostic.  Also, while OpenStack states clearly that Flavours are sizing mechanism but then it allows profile information to be included through "extra-specs", etc. As you know SMT is enabled when the infrastructure node is being configured (i.e., per info as in profiles) while flavours are about configuring in the Virtual Infrastructure Layer.
